Decorators (#5)
NullVoxPopuli/rfcs: text/0000-decorators.md

- Start Date: 2018-10-20
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Ember Issue: (leave this empty)

# Decorators

## Summary

Native classes are now officially supported in Ember, but currently their usage
is very limited. Core Ember features such as computed properties, actions, and
service injections have no publicly supported APIs to be used with native class
syntax.

Decorators provide a way to abstract functionality and improve the developer
experience of working with native classes.  This RFC outlines the implementation
and rollout plan for bringing decorators to ember's computed properties (and
other behavior) for use in native classes.

### A Note on Decorator Stability

Decorators are important to adopting native class syntax. They are a
formalization of the patterns we have been using as a community for years (as
discussed later on in this RFC), and it will not be possible to use native

> classes ergonomically without them unless a number of major concepts (Computed

Reviewer: s/Computed/computed/

properties, injections, actions) are rethought. That said, decorators are still

> a _stage 2_ proposal in TC39, and merging support for them before stage 3 would

Reviewer: link to TC39 stages and summarize how being stage 2 is relevant to this RFC

1. If there are changes to the spec, and it ***is*** possible to avoid changing
the public APIs of decorators, then Ember will make the changes necessary to
avoid public API changes.

2. If there are changes to the spec, and it ***is not*** possible to avoid
breaking changes, Ember will minimize the changes as much as possible, and will
provide a codemod to convert from the previous version of the spec to the next.

3. If the spec is dropped from TC39 altogether, Ember will continue to provide
support for decorators via babel transforms until they are deprecated following
the standard RFC process, and removed according to semver. Replacements for the
core concepts of features that require decorators _will_ be made.

It is possible that decorators will be advanced before this RFC closes and this
will be a non-issue. Either way, if accepted, Ember would do the best it can to
provide the stability the framework is known for throughout this process.

## Terminology

For the purposes of this RFC, we'll use the following terminology:

* The **Octane programming model** refers to the new programming model
  established by the Ember Octane edition. It includes _native classes_,

>   _tracked properties_ and _glimmer components_, and more generally refers to

Reviewer: s/glimmer/Glimmer/

  features that will be considered _core to Ember_ in the future.
* The **legacy programming model** refers to the traditional programming model.
  It includes _legacy classes_, _computed properties_, _event listeners_,
  _observers_, _property notifications_, and _legacy components_, and more
  generally refers to features that will not be central to Ember Octane.
* **Native classes** are classes defined using the JavaScript `class` keyword
* **Legacy classes** are classes defined by subclassing from `EmberObject`
  using the static `extend` method.

## Motivation

Native JavaScript class syntax has been evolving for some time now, filling in
the cracks and providing better, more standardized ways to write classes for the
web. They will be a key part of the Octane programming model, and the ES Classes
RFC was the first step toward enabling Ember users to use native class syntax,
but there are still key features of Ember that are not usable with `class`

> syntax today, including: *Computed properties*, *actions*, and *injections*.

Reviewer: s/Computed/computed/, no need for a colon here

These features cannot be used ergonomically with native classes as it stands.

> The only options are to either using Ember's `defineProperty` function directly,

Reviewer: s/using/use/

change in the same way.

In general usage, these three definitions are equivalent:

```js
import EmberObject, { computed } from '@ember/object';

const Person = EmberObject.extend({
  fullName: computed('firstName', 'lastName', {
    get() {
      return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
    }
  })
});

class Person {
  @computed('firstName', 'lastName')
  get fullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}

class Person {
  @computed('firstName', 'lastName', {
    get() {
      return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
    }
  })
  fullName;
}
```

That last example may seem confusing at first, but this is actually the same as
defining a computed property macro:

```js
import EmberObject, { computed } from '@ember/object';

function join(...dependentKeys) {
  return computed(...dependentKeys, {
    get() {
      return dependentKeys.map(key => this[key]).join(' ');
    }
  });
}

class Person {
  @join('firstName', 'lastName')
  fullName;
}
```

Notably, using computed as a decorator _directly_ will not be supported. This is
to prevent a parameter check on a critical path:

```js
class Person {

>   @computed

Reviewer: `@computed()` would also work, right?

Author: yes, absolutely. It shouldn't be necessary _most_ of the time, but it will work.

Author: Good for lazy computation with caching I suppose

Reviewer: Right, that's a significant difference. People use this pattern not only for caching but also to make the reification process lazy. Whether it makes a noticeable performance impact is debatable, but I could see it mattering in some cases.

Author: I'll add a callout to that then, so people know it can still be used

});
```

The decorator returned from `computed()` will need to have these chainable
methods available, and they will need to set the state of the decorator. This
should not be too difficult to accomplish.

Usage in native decorator syntax is a little bit trickier. In the current
proposal, only simple chaining is allowed in a decorator invocation. You may not
chain on the result of a function:

```js
import { computed } from '@ember/object';

const fullName = computed('firstName', 'lastName', function() {
  return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
});

class Person {
  @computed('firstName', 'lastName').readOnly() // this is invalid
  get fullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }

  @fullName.readOnly() // this is valid because it's a simple chain
  otherFullName;
}
```

Luckily, there is one other form of invocation which is available - wrapping the
entire decorator expression in parenthesis:

```js
import { computed } from '@ember/object';

class Person {
  @(computed('firstName', 'lastName').readOnly()) // this is valid
  get fullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}
```

> This is clearly _not_ ideal for commonly used features, and while `volatile()`

Reviewer 2: We can tackle this in a follow-on discussion or the official RFC when you open it, but it strikes me that this might be a nice thing to build as an optional feature (enabled by default in v3 blueprints, including Octane), so that apps and addons which wish to opt out of it (and the associated increase in size) can do so. For example, in our application, we *never* need to be using these macros—there is exactly one place where we have one, and we've wanted to remove it for a bit and just haven't gotten around to it yet.

```js
class Foo {
  @action
  onClick() { /* ... */ }
}
```

This would be implemented by creating the class's `actions` object and assigning
the method to it, setting up inheritance and such in the process. The decorator
leaves the method definition on the class, where it can be called like a normal
method would, including `super` functionality. This maintains compatibility with
the legacy object model, while making the `actions` namespace an
_implementation_ detail rather than something users need to know about.

This does mean that actions can once again collide with actual lifecycle and
event hooks on the class, since they are no longer namespaced. The decorator
_could_ remove the method from the class definition entirely, but this would be
confusing for users not familiar with the old `actions` namespace - why does
this method disappear from the class? It would also break `super` functionality,
so it would not be ideal to do this.

The `@action` decorator _could_ warn users when it collides with a lifecycle
hook. However, hooks may vary from class type to class type, which presents a
design challenge. We could either:

> A. Allow classes to specify lifecycle hooks, and throw whenever `@action`

Reviewer: Can we fix the formatting of this list? This doesn't appear as a list in Markdown.

   collides with a specified hook.
B. Only throw on hooks that are shared across all classes, such as `init` and
   `destroy`.
C. Do nothing, and leave it to user's to know which lifecycle hooks exist.

Specifying hooks for each class would be time consuming and could fall out of
sync with the implementations. Throwing on "universal" hooks only is
inconsistent, and could lead users to think that they are safe when they are
not. This RFC suggests that we choose option C for this reason. When the actions
namespace was introduced, lifecycle hooks like `didUpdateAttrs` and
`didInsertElement` were less commonly known and used (event listeners were not

> uncommon). Most Ember users know they exist now, and will be aware that

Reviewer: These hooks were never really the gotcha. The two biggest gotchas were:

1. `destroy`, which is a very tempting action name (e.g. destroy a todo item in a list) but will always get invoked when the component is destroyed, much to people's surprise.
2. DOM event hooks like `click()`. It's very common to have an action called `click`, but if you have a component method with this name, it will automatically get called if there's a click _anywhere_ inside the component, not just where you attached the action.

In either case, I think we can safely enumerate this list and lint if you have an action with the same name.

For existing users, or users who have to interact with legacy code from a modern
context, it'll be important to have a reference for the legacy object model.
The current section on the object model in the guides can be moved to a legacy
section, and a section on updating should be added. Links to relevant codemods,
such as the
[ember-es6-class-codemod](https://github.com/scalvert/ember-es6-class-codemod),
should be included.

## Drawbacks

* The `ComputedProperty` class has long been considered intimate API. Even with
  recent changes as part of the native getter RFC to make it more private, these
  changes could still cause breakage.
* The strategy for converting `computed` to decorators has one major drawback,
  which is that decorator macros cannot easily be customized and will require a
  bit of boilerplate in some cases. For instance, currently in Ember Decorators
  it is possible to apply the `map` and `reduce` macros directly to a _method_,
  which becomes the method to map or reduce by:

  ```js
  @map('array')
  mappedArray() {}

  @map('array', function() {}) mappedArray;
  ```

  With this method, only the second form would be usable. Likewise, by default

>   addons like Ember Data would need to write thin decorator wrappers around

Reviewer: Let's make sure the Ember Data team has a chance to weigh in on this and is okay with this approach.

the method to it, setting up inheritance and such in the process. The decorator
leaves the method definition on the class, where it can be called like a normal
method would, including `super` functionality. This maintains compatibility with
the class object model, while making the `actions` namespace an _implementation_
detail rather than something users need to know about.

This does mean that actions can once again collide with actual lifecycle and
event hooks on the class, since they are no longer namespaced. The decorator
_could_ remove the method from the class definition entirely, but this would be
confusing for users not familiar with the old `actions` namespace - why does
this method disappear from the class? It would also break `super` functionality,
so it would not be ideal to do this.

The `@action` decorator _could_ warn users when it collides with a lifecycle
hook. However, hooks may vary from class type to class type, which presents a
design challenge. We could either:

A. Allow classes to specify lifecycle hooks, and throw whenever `@action`
   collides with a specified hook.
B. Only throw on hooks that are shared across all classes, such as `init` and
   `destroy`.

> C. Do nothing, and leave it to user's to know which lifecycle hooks exist.

Reviewer 3: FWIW, this is not showing up as an actual list when viewed, rather just a paragraph.

- Start Date: 2018-10-20
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Ember Issue: (leave this empty)

# Decorators

## Summary

Native classes are now officially supported in Ember, but currently their usage
is very limited. Core Ember features such as computed properties, actions, and
service injections have no publicly supported APIs to be used with native class
syntax.

Decorators provide a way to abstract functionality and improve the developer

> experience of working with native classes.  This RFC outlines the implementation

Reviewer 4: Decorators provide a mechanism for expositing these features to ES6 consumers, while ensuring interoperability with code written in the traditional `Ember.Object.extend` way

and rollout plan for bringing decorators to Ember's computed properties (and
other behavior) for use in native classes.

### A Note on Decorator Stability

> Decorators are important to adopting native class syntax. They are a

Reviewer 4: you may want to mention something about "stuff that belongs on prototypes" as part of the motivation for decorators

core concepts of features that require decorators _will_ be made.

It is possible that decorators will be advanced before this RFC closes and this
will be a non-issue. Either way, if accepted, Ember would do the best it can to
provide the stability the framework is known for throughout this process.

## Terminology

For the purposes of this RFC, we'll use the following terminology:

* The **Octane programming model** refers to the new programming model
  established by the Ember Octane edition. It includes _native classes_,
  _tracked properties_ and _Glimmer components_, and more generally refers to
  features that will be considered _core to Ember_ in the future.
* The **legacy programming model** refers to the traditional programming model.
  It includes _legacy classes_, _computed properties_, _event listeners_,
  _observers_, _property notifications_, and _legacy components_, and more
  generally refers to features that will not be central to Ember Octane.
* **Native classes** are classes defined using the JavaScript `class` keyword
* **Legacy classes** are classes defined by subclassing from `EmberObject`
  using the static `extend` method.

## Motivation

> Native JavaScript class syntax has been evolving for some time now, filling in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Native JavaScript class syntax has been evolving for the past three years, filling in
```

decorator with parameters. We are invoking a function which _returns_ a
decorator, so it desugars to:

```js
const aliasForPrefix = alias('prefix');

class Person {
  @aliasForPrefix title;
}
```

Therefore, the `alias` function _must_ itself return a decorator function.
However, this conflicts with usage in the legacy programming model:

```js
const Person = EmberObject.extend({
  title: alias('prefix')
})
```

We just established that `alias` must return a decorator function, but here it
is with the exact same arguments, and it needs to return a `ComputedProperty`
instance. There is nothing we can branch on here - in both cases, `alias` only
receives the string `'prefix'`, so it has no context for how it will be used.

The native class piece of this puzzle is completely inflexible. A decorator must
be a function, there is no choice about it. However, the _Ember_ piece is _very_
flexible. The legacy object model just needs a way to get the meta information
for the property when the class is being finalized. We can either assign the
meta information to the decorator function directly, or we can associate it via

> a `WeakMap`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a [`WeakMap`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/WeakMap).
```

will require slight updates as they use a subclass of the `ComputedProperty`
class. These updates should be relatively minor, and will follow the same
strategy as `computed()`.

#### Usage and API

The API for `computed` will remain mostly the same. The key differences will be:

1. The result of `computed` will be a decorator which can be applied directly to
   native _getters_, _setters_, and _class fields_.
2. The `ComputedPropertyConfig` (the getter/setter functions) argument provided
   to `computed` will now be optional when used as a decorator on a native
   getter or setter, and the native getter/setter will be used instead.

```ts
function computed(...args: (string | ComputedPropertyConfig)[]): PropertyDecorator;
```

The function signatures of all existing macros, including `inject` macros, would
change in the same way.

In general usage, these three definitions are equivalent:

```js
import EmberObject, { computed } from '@ember/object';

const Person = EmberObject.extend({
  fullName: computed('firstName', 'lastName', {
    get() {
      return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
    }
  })
});

class Person {

>   @computed('firstName', 'lastName')

Reviewer 4: Major selling point that you may want to point out:

If `@computed` works in the same way as the current ember-decorators implementation, it may be used on a vanilla ES6 class _without having to extend from `EmberObject`_.

    }
  })
  fullName;
}
```

That last example may seem confusing at first, but this is actually the same as
defining a computed property macro:

```js
import EmberObject, { computed } from '@ember/object';

function join(...dependentKeys) {
  return computed(...dependentKeys, {
    get() {
      return dependentKeys.map(key => this[key]).join(' ');
    }
  });
}

class Person {
  @join('firstName', 'lastName')
  fullName;
}
```

Notably, using computed as a decorator _directly_ will not be supported. This is
to prevent a parameter check on a critical path:

```js
class Person {
  @computed
  get fullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}
```

The most common use case for this form in legacy classes was to provide a new
instance of an object or array per instance of the class. This use case is
solved in native classes by class fields:

```js
const Person = EmberObject.extend({
  cache: computed(function() {
    return {};
  })
})

class Person {
  cache = {};
}
```

For other use cases, such as lazy evaluation and caching, it will still be
possible to call `@computed` with no arguments:

```js
class Person {
  @computed()

>   get cache {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  get cache() {
```

class field decorator. Otherwise, it returns an accessor (getter/setter)
decorator.

#### Property Modifiers

Almost all computed property modifiers have been deprecated at this point, but
they are still in use today and will still be available until Ember v4. As such,
their syntax needs to remain available and unchanged:

```js
import EmberObject, { computed } from '@ember/object';

const Person = EmberObject.extend({
  fullName: computed('firstName', {
    get() {
      return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
    }
  }).readOnly().volatile().property('lastName') // a very strange combination
});
```

The decorator returned from `computed()` will need to have these chainable
methods available, and they will need to set the state of the decorator. This
should not be too difficult to accomplish.

Usage in native decorator syntax is a little bit trickier. In the current
proposal, only simple chaining is allowed in a decorator invocation. You may not
chain on the result of a function:

```js
import { computed } from '@ember/object';

const fullName = computed('firstName', 'lastName', function() {
  return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
});

class Person {

>   @computed('firstName', 'lastName').readOnly() // this is invalid

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  @computed('firstName', 'lastName').readOnly() // this is invalid JS decorator syntax
```

methods as actions.

#### Usage and API

The API for this new decorator would be much simpler than the computed API,
since it is only used as a decorator without parameters.

```ts
// Technically `action` is a function, but we can't type it transparently that way
const action: MethodDecorator;
```

Attempting to pass any parameters to the decorator, or to apply the decorator to
anything other than a class method, will throw an error.

## How we teach this

Teaching decorators is intrinsically tied to a wider shift in the Ember
programming model - the Ember Octane edition. From a teaching perspective, this
edition will be completely overhauling the guides and updating all of the best
practices as they stand. New users should see native class syntax with
decorators as the _default_, and should not ever have to write a legacy class
or see an example for one.

With this RFC, the majority of existing examples in the Ember guides will be
updatable to native class syntax. The exception would be examples of legacy
components, which would be addressed separately by updating the guides to
Glimmer Components (proposed in a separate RFC). Otherwise, all examples in the

> guides should be updated.

Reviewer 4: I'd go one step further and suggest that as long as we support `Ember.Object.extend` and its use is not deprecated, we should have current-version documentation describing proper usage.

As you point out, this could be relegated to (and confined within) a "legacy programming model" section of the guides or something.

### Updating and Interop

For existing users, or users who have to interact with legacy code from a modern
context, it'll be important to have a reference for the legacy object model.
The current section on the object model in the guides can be moved to a legacy
section, and a section on updating should be added. Links to relevant codemods,
such as the
[ember-es6-class-codemod](https://github.com/scalvert/ember-es6-class-codemod),
should be included.

## Drawbacks

> * The `ComputedProperty` class has long been considered intimate API. Even with

Reviewer 4: Is this true? We usually reserve the term "intimate API" for private APIs whose use is widespread enough that we cannot make certain changes without causing some painful disruption to the ecosystem.

`ComputedProperty` is public API https://www.emberjs.com/api/ember/release/classes/ComputedProperty

Author: Hoo boy, that makes things a bit tricky...

it seems like the documentation there is mainly for usage of `computed`, but yes I do think this constitutes public. I don't think this is very widely used, but we should look into the major users and make sure we have an update path. I do think it should still be possible to use prototypical inheritance, but `class` syntax to extend would be out.

Reviewer 2: The Router type gives precedent for having a class that is public for use and naming the type in TS but *not* public for subclassing. That might be useful here?
